docs: add data packing and serialization guide (#22448)
AztecProtocol/aztec-packages: docs/docs-developers/docs/aztec-nr/framework-description/data_packing.md

## Serialize and Deserialize

`Serialize` and `Deserialize` define how data is encoded when passing arguments to public functions or returning values. They **must follow Noir's intrinsic serialization**: each struct member becomes one or more `Field` values, with no packing or compression.

This is required because when a transaction calls a public function, TypeScript serializes the arguments into an initial witness using Noir's built-in format. If your Noir-side `Serialize` implementation produces a different layout, you get an **arguments hash mismatch** error.

```rust
// Derive is almost always what you want: it matches Noir's intrinsic format
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
struct MyArgs {
    amount: u128,    // 1 Field
    enabled: bool,   // 1 Field
    owner: Field,    // 1 Field
}
// Serialize::N = 3 (one Field per member)
```

:::warning
Do not hand-roll `Serialize` or `Deserialize` for types passed as function arguments. The encoding must match what TypeScript sends, and the derive macro ensures this automatically.
:::

> ### When derives are added for you vs. manually

Reviewer: shouldn't this go below where we intro packable?

Reviewer: I'm ngl I actually find this whole table confusing :c 

I would love if it was a "When to use Serialize/Deserialize" -> func args/return types that are structs (then show me an example) - otherwise lit dw about it 

"When to use Packable" 
- -> custom notes (show example) -> then show me a custom packable impl and it being used in a custom note
- For if you wanna pass a struct as the data type for a PublicMut or PbImmute -> show me an example with Pakcable and custom packable 

This is the decision tree. currently, im like "ok I need to know what these things are and its my job to do it but i literally have no clue when I need to use it" - I just had to have a chat with claude to understand

Does this make sense or am I being a dummy here?

Reviewer: Part of the confusion comes from saying "your struct" when it wasn't clear to me that this isn't the storage struct but 
1. Note struct (not note hash but like the literal struct containing the note data)
2. Structs as func args/returns
3. Structs being passed as the data type to pubmut/pubimmut

Author: you're right a lot of this info should be pushed down. I kept the table, but i think its more clear now with better ordering

## When to use Serialize and Deserialize

Reach for `Serialize` / `Deserialize` when a struct is used as a function argument, return value, or event payload.

The encoding must follow Noir's intrinsic serialization: each struct member becomes one or more `Field` values, with no packing or compression. When a transaction calls a public function, TypeScript serializes the arguments into an initial witness using Noir's built-in format. If your Noir-side implementation produces a different layout, you get an "arguments hash mismatch" error.

Use `#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]`:

```rust
// Matches Noir's intrinsic format automatically.
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
struct MyArgs {
    amount: u128,    // 1 Field
    enabled: bool,   // 1 Field
    owner: Field,    // 1 Field
}
// Serialize::N = 3 (one Field per member)
```

For events, `#[event]` auto-derives `Serialize` for you. You typically do not need `Deserialize` or `Packable` on events.

:::warning
Do not hand-roll `Serialize` or `Deserialize` for types passed as function arguments. The encoding must match what TypeScript sends, and the derive macro ensures this automatically.
:::

## When to use Packable

> Use `Packable` when a struct is used as a note or as the data type of a state variable (`PublicMutable<T>`, `PublicImmutable<T>`, `DelayedPublicMutable<T>`). `Packable` defines how the value is encoded when written to storage or hashed into a note. It never needs to match any external format; it only needs to roundtrip: `unpack(pack(x)) == x`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `Packable` for note `structs` when creating custom notes or as the data type of a state variable (`PublicMutable<T>`, `PublicImmutable<T>`, `DelayedPublicMutable<T>`). `Packable` defines how the value is encoded when written to storage or hashed into a note. It never needs to match any external format; it only needs to roundtrip: `unpack(pack(x)) == x`.
```

There are two cases.

### Case 1: a custom note

`#[note]` _requires_ the struct to implement `Packable` but does **not** add it for you. Place `#[derive(Packable)]` on the struct before applying `#[note]`, or the macro will fail compilation with an explicit message.

When a note's members are already `Field`-sized, deriving is enough:

> #include_code field_like_note /docs/examples/contracts/packing_example/src/types.nr rust

Reviewer: Eq is here & they might be confused - can we link to docs for this & when its needed below (do we need to add this too? Idk what it is tbf)

This is how the built-in note types work too: [`AddressNote`](pathname:///aztec-nr-api/#api_ref_version/address_note/struct.AddressNote) and [`FieldNote`](pathname:///aztec-nr-api/#api_ref_version/field_note/struct.FieldNote) both derive `Packable` directly because their members are already `Field` or `AztecAddress`.

> When a note has members smaller than a `Field` (`bool`, `u8`, `u32`, `u64`), you can skip the `Packable` derive and write a custom implementation that packs multiple values into a single `Field`:

Reviewer: love love love - clear af

#include_code card_note /docs/examples/contracts/packing_example/src/types.nr rust

Derived `Packable` would give `CardNote` an `N = 2`; the custom impl halves that to `N = 1`. Smaller `N` means fewer inputs to the note hash, which directly reduces the gate count of private functions.

### Case 2: a struct used as a state variable's data type

> `#[storage]` requires every state variable's data type to implement `Packable`, but it does not add it for you. Put `#[derive(Packable)]` on the struct yourself.

Reviewer: Should we say that uint etc add this already? so this is for when your ddata type is a struct itself e.g., `PublicMutable<MyStruct, Context>`

When all members are already `Field`-sized (`Field`, `AztecAddress`, and types built from them), deriving is sufficient:

#include_code derived_packable /docs/examples/contracts/packing_example/src/types.nr rust

Each element in the packed `[Field; N]` array maps to one AVM storage opcode. For [`PublicMutable`](pathname:///aztec-nr-api/#api_ref_version/noir_aztec/state_vars/struct.PublicMutable) and [`PublicImmutable`](pathname:///aztec-nr-api/#api_ref_version/noir_aztec/state_vars/struct.PublicImmutable), that opcode is `SLOAD` on read or `SSTORE` on write. [`DelayedPublicMutable`](pathname:///aztec-nr-api/#api_ref_version/noir_aztec/state_vars/struct.DelayedPublicMutable) works the same way. Fewer elements means fewer storage operations, reducing L2 gas and DA cost.

> When your struct has members smaller than a `Field`, deriving still uses one whole `Field` per member, which is wasteful. The next section shows how to write a manual implementation that collapses them.

Reviewer: noice

Reviewer: idk why or how this is yellow lol

```

This prime is ~253.58 bits (slightly less than 2^254), so not every 254-bit value is a valid `Field`. To avoid modular wrap-around when packing, keep the sum of all member bit widths **≤ 253 bits**. For example, `u128 + u64 + u32 = 224 bits` packs safely, but `2 × u128 = 256 bits` does not.

### Step 2: Pack by multiplying with powers of 2

`2.pow_32(k)` computes `2^k`, which is equivalent to a left shift by `k` bits for integer-valued `Field`s. Add the shifted values together to concatenate them inside a single `Field`:

#include_code game_state_pack /docs/examples/contracts/packing_example/src/types.nr rust

The bit layout you choose is arbitrary; the only requirement is that `pack` and `unpack` agree. The example above places `score` (a `u32`) at the lowest bits because a truncating cast (`packed[0] as u32`) then extracts it for free, with no subtraction or division. When you have a member whose width matches a standard `uN` type, putting it in the lowest position makes `unpack` cleaner. The remaining members can be placed in any order above it.

### Step 3: Unpack by extracting from lowest bits upward

> Extract values from lowest bits first, subtracting each extracted value before extracting the next:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extract values from lowest bits first, to match how we packed them, subtracting each extracted value before extracting the next:
```

| `Serialize` / `Deserialize` | ABI encoding for function arguments, return values, events | Public dispatch (calldata), oracles, TypeScript interop | No — must match Noir's intrinsic format |
| `Packable` | Compact encoding for storage and note hashing | `PublicMutable`, `PublicImmutable`, note hashes, storage reads/writes | Yes — this is the main optimization lever |

Understanding the difference matters because using the wrong trait — or missing an opportunity for custom packing — can waste gas, storage slots, and proving time.

## Serialize and Deserialize

`Serialize` and `Deserialize` define how data is encoded when passing arguments to public functions or returning values. They **must follow Noir's intrinsic serialization**: each struct member becomes one or more `Field` values, with no packing or compression.

This is required because when a transaction calls a public function, TypeScript serializes the arguments into an initial witness using Noir's built-in format. If your Noir-side `Serialize` implementation produces a different layout, you get an **arguments hash mismatch** error.

```rust
// Derive is almost always what you want — it matches Noir's intrinsic format

> #[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]

Reviewer: Should we say that this is included automatically as part of the #[storage] macro so they know they don't need to add it themselves (when would I need to actually - im not sure on this)

struct MyArgs {
    amount: u128,    // 1 Field
    enabled: bool,   // 1 Field
    owner: Field,    // 1 Field
}
// Serialize::N = 3 (one Field per member)
```

:::warning
Do not hand-roll `Serialize` or `Deserialize` for types passed as function arguments. The encoding must match what TypeScript sends, and the derive macro ensures this automatically.
:::

## Packable

> `Packable` defines how data is encoded for **storage** and **note hashing**. Unlike `Serialize`, it does not need to match any external format — it only needs to roundtrip correctly (`unpack(pack(x)) == x`). This means you can pack multiple sub-`Field` values into a single `Field`, reducing storage operations and hash inputs.

Reviewer: did we add not to use m-dashes in the claude.md ? I think we should remove the one here

Author: ill remove them and update the claude.md

### Where Packable matters

- **Public storage** (`PublicMutable`, `PublicImmutable`): Each element in the packed array corresponds to one `SLOAD` or `SSTORE` AVM opcode. Fewer elements means fewer storage operations, reducing both L2 gas and DA costs.
- **Note hashing**: The packed array is fed into the note hash computation. Fewer fields means fewer hash operations, reducing proving time for private functions.

> - **`DelayedPublicMutable`**: Also uses `Packable` for its underlying storage reads/writes.

Reviewer: can we link to the api ref for delayed pub mut

```rust
impl Packable for GameState {
    let N: u32 = 1;

    fn pack(self) -> [Field; Self::N] {
        [
            (self.started as Field) * 2.pow_32(64)
            + (self.round as Field) * 2.pow_32(32)
            + (self.score as Field)
        ]
    }

    fn unpack(packed: [Field; Self::N]) -> Self {
        let score = packed[0] as u32;
        let round = ((packed[0] - score as Field) / 2.pow_32(32)) as u32;
        let started = ((packed[0] - score as Field - (round as Field) * 2.pow_32(32)) / 2.pow_32(64)) as u1 != 0;
        Self { started, round, score }
    }
}
// N = 1 instead of 3: 3x fewer SLOAD/SSTORE operations
```

## How to write custom Packable implementations

The core technique is **bit-packing with powers of 2**. This maps efficiently to both AVM opcodes (public functions) and proving backend primitives (private functions).

### Step 1: Determine bit widths

For each member, determine how many bits it needs:

| Type | Bit width |
|------|-----------|
| `bool` | 1 |
| `u8` | 8 |
| `u16` | 16 |
| `u32` | 32 |
| `u64` | 64 |
| `u128` | 128 |
| `Field` | ~254 (cannot be packed with other values) |
| `AztecAddress` | ~254 (wraps a `Field`) |

> A single `Field` can hold up to 254 bits, but the field modulus is slightly less than 2^254. In practice, keeping the total bit width comfortably below 254 (e.g., 192 bits for a u128 + u64) avoids overflow issues.

Reviewer: should we not be specific about the field mod and what the max number of bits we can have before overflow is? 

Also why is Field "~" that width - we know the size no?

Author: yea ill update to keep the packed total <253 bits.

### Step 2: Pack by multiplying with powers of 2

Place the **smallest** value in the lowest bits and shift larger values upward:

```rust
// Layout within a single Field:
// [  value_a (128 bits)  |  value_b (64 bits)  |  value_c (32 bits)  ]
//   bits 96..223            bits 32..95            bits 0..31

fn pack(self) -> [Field; 1] {
    [

>         (self.value_a as Field) * 2.pow_32(96)     // shift left by 96 bits

Reviewer: why are we using `value_a` rather than the actual variables we know the types of and therefore size now? why do we have to size order?

Author: ill update for consistency. size ordering isnt strictly necessary, its currently overstated. will fix

        + (self.value_b as Field) * 2.pow_32(32)   // shift left by 32 bits
        + (self.value_c as Field)                   // lowest bits
    ]
}
```

### Step 3: Unpack by extracting from lowest bits upward

> Extract values from lowest bits first, subtracting each extracted value before extracting the next:

Reviewer: ok so answer is to above is just so that its consistent with unpacking?

Author: yea, unpacking could be whatever order as well, it just has to match

    Self { value_a, value_b, value_c }
}
```

### Step 4: Write roundtrip tests

Always test that `unpack(pack(x)) == x` for boundary values:

```rust
#[test]
fn test_pack_unpack() {
    let original = MyStruct { value_a: 1000000, value_b: 42, value_c: 0 };
    let unpacked = MyStruct::unpack(original.pack());
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_a, original.value_a);
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_b, original.value_b);
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_c, original.value_c);
}

#[test]
fn test_pack_unpack_max() {
    let original = MyStruct {
        value_a: 0xffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff, // max u128
        value_b: 0xffffffffffffffff,                 // max u64
        value_c: 0xffffffff,                          // max u32
    };
    let unpacked = MyStruct::unpack(original.pack());
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_a, original.value_a);
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_b, original.value_b);
    assert_eq(unpacked.value_c, original.value_c);
}
```

## Examples

### Derived Packable (Field-sized members)

When all struct members are already `Field`-sized, `#[derive(Packable)]` is all you need:

> #include_code derived_packable /docs/examples/contracts/packing_example/src/types.nr rust

Reviewer: should we say where this is already used by default
